tough to really answer which one was the toughest.
Now, I was wondering about, as director in 56 and
57, were you ever approached by, you must have
worked, not approached by, but you must have
worked with the builders of the aircraft, didn't
you? Yeah, they sometimes came by and talked
about. What was your relations with these people?
More as technical representatives in terms of
what we thought about various aspects of the
airplane and the simulators, too. Were there
certain simulators, too? Did they build the
simulators?
I think simulators probably built by different
people. Were there certain guidelines? You're in
a position where you could make recommendations
to the Pentagon pro or con a certain airplane
because of the problems with training, I would
imagine. Is that true? Yes, we made our
recommendations to the training commander, and
they made them to the Pentagon. So did the Air Force
set up certain guidelines that you'd have to
follow when you talked to these representatives
from the companies?
No. Usually they were there to tell us about
something they had done to fix something that had
been a problem, and to
get our opinion on different
things. When did we start When did we start, of
course this is a time of nuclear deployment too,
and we were having nuclear, our atomic bomb
testing. When did we start deploying nuclear
weapons on fighters? When did we?
We got them in Europe when I was there. In the 60s. So
that was 60 to 62. They had them before then, I
imagine.
I don't know what that was like. So we had tactical
nuclear weapons then. Did you ever have any
training? You had nuclear capabilities on these
airplanes that you were training your students.
Did you have any training or remember any
training, special training,
I must have been new. No, we had a school area at
Randolph that we ran. It had to do with
characteristics. And I had a course at Sandia. I
had a course at Sandia. People attended. On all
the, I think all of them had to attend. All those who
were involved with it. They
had to have that orientation course, and they had
courses of their own in the organization.
So this was set up before you even got on? Well, we
had a special weapons section in the Crew Training
Air Force. We were responsible for setting up the
syllabuses and the curriculum for these courses.
That started a long time before I got it. So it
started a long time before the mid-50s. Probably
started when? Early 30s? Early 50s? At least then.
Maybe even late 40s. Were there any special
problems because of the nuclear deployment?
Well, yes. You had a high degree of...
You had to have a high degree of training. People
had to be qualified and then they had to display
that proficiency. Sure.
And safety was prime. It was paramount to
everybody. And you could certainly flunk an ORI or
something else if you messed up in any way or any
other special way.
What was it? We had procedures that had to be
followed in the letter. I would
imagine. And everybody was supposed to know.
What about an attack procedure to use a tactical
nuclear weapon? on infantry or tanks or something
like that how could an airplane ever move in and
drop a low level particular weapon and then escape
the blast itself we all we were using him he'd come
down and pull up toss it over your shoulder you roll
out i see what's known as the shoulder toss i see so
he'd come down real low you wouldn't We wouldn't
use a tactical weapon on it, just troops. No,
they'd be on something bigger than that. Did you
practice? Not practice, but I mean, did you train
against ships, like a squadron of ships or
something like that? No.
We had practiced. We practiced against ships, but
I mean, you didn't target them. Because
they make an excellent radar. Oh,
yeah. Doing it by radar is an excellent target.
Most of the work that I was associated with was for
ground targets. Airfields. Plants.
See
these? Particular
parts of the area. Radar. Wow. After you left that
job, you had a rather unusual job as the Air Force
Senior Advisor for three years, 57 to 60, in
Indiana. In the Indiana National Guard. That is an
unusual assignment, isn't it? Or an Air Force
colonel? No. But I mean for somebody with your
background. They have one in every state. And this
was a fighter wing. And I was there as advisor
to the wing commander and three squadrons.
Advise in what? advising them on the Air Force
policies and procedures. I had some, I had the Air
Force advisor, officer type pilot with each
squadron. And I had the airmen, specialists, and
personnel in supply and maintenance. And we
observed their procedures during their training
and advised them on it. Helped them keep their
records right and see if they kept their records
right. All on Air Force procedures. What did you
think was the quality of the National Guard? Did
you form any opinion? Very impressive. Really?
Very impressive. As a matter of fact, they came to
Europe right after that and they did a hell of a job.
They came to Europe when
truman
i mean not truman kennedy sent sent all those units
over there in the 60s they did a real fine job
They really develop a lot of good pilots,
well-trained pilots. And the core of the whole
thing are the technicians, which are there all the
time and do all the maintenance on the airplanes.
And the other people come in on the
weekends and go to camp in the summertime. And they
build up some darn good units. And they've got a lot
of talent, just a lot of
talent in the National Guard. I've often heard
from some reserve officers that there's some
tension between reserve officers and the Army
Reserve, National Guard, et cetera, and the
radar. regular officers. Did you find any of them?
What's your comment on that?
Well, I think the regular officers tend to look
down on the reserves. It's not being
trained. By and large, the reserves and the
National Guard are a lot of them. I know the
National Guard isn't a reserve. It's probably not
as well done as Might as well train. Might as well
train. Really? They don't
have it. The National Guard got double
motivation. They work for the state, too. Sure.
The state has put up
with it. They won't put up with it. A lot. They won't
put up with it. Thank you, thank you, or anything
like that. Okay. Depends on the state, would you
say? Probably
depends on the general state. I'm sure
it's the same. I guess it would be different in
different states. I've been associated with lots
of National Guard organizations. I've been
associated with a number of organizations. But
all of them in Indiana and some of them here in Texas
are aware. Indiana, yes, I investigated an
accident. That's one thing senior advisors does,
is to send to investigate the accident of the
commander of the 10th Air Force. It was the 10th. I
don't know where they are now. And they report back
on it. part of it is looking over the squadron to see
what kind of people we got and how they do it and what
the procedures are. I investigated one
there in the Dallas Naval Air Station. There was a
National Guard squadron there, a Texas National
Guard squadron there,
I don't know what they were flying. They had an
accident on the T-33.
And what did you think of the Texas Air National?
And I also was with them at Ellington
and
Ohio, Indiana, Illinois, Michigan, Minnesota.
all those National Guard units on committee. And
they're all good organizations. I've heard from
some that there's more politics in the National
Guard than in regular service. What's your
opinion of that? That's probably true.
Is that decreased efficiency, or did you have any
problems with that? Any problems that you had to
deal with directly in Indiana? No, there were no
problems there. Politics is an adjunct general,
who the adjunct general is. Sure.
I guess getting to be appointed, you have to know
the head of the
general. But as far as the officers that you met in
the Air National Guard, you found them of what type
of quality? High quality. High quality. High
quality. High caliber people. Let's move on then.
They spent the next four years in Germany. I spent
two years
with the 86th Air Division, which you grew out of
the 86th Fighter Interceptor.
It's Swineford. Mm-hmm. Oh, so it was her reunion.
Well, not really. I was director of operations for
two years, and we
phased out the F-86B and phased in the F-102 for our
interceptors.
And we also had the radar squadron. We found an
operations center.
Did you have any dealings during these four years?
Did you deal with NATO? Well, we had a German
liaison officer on staff.
And so did you go out on maneuvers with other NATO
air forces? Well, we participated in joint
exercises, NATO exercises, yes. Q And what were
your feelings about NATO and its ability to defend
Western Europe? A Well, I thought Air Force-wise,
we had a pretty good organization. I didn't know
about the ground troops.
At that time, we had tactical
nuclear missiles, too. When did we develop those?
They were there. When did we develop those? When
did we develop
them? In the 40s, late 40s. So these were
air-to-air? No, they were air-to-ground. Okay,
air-to-ground.
It's a Matador missile, I think. Matador, yeah. We
hit them. They were under us, too.
And so you were training with those missiles,
basically? Yes.
Director of Operations, what were your duties
there?
I had charge of all the flying and training.
Combat
crew evaluation,
tactical evaluation, we had a tactical
evaluation team. And we were responsible for all
the training programs and all the crew training
programs and so forth.
and all the operations. You didn't get to fly
yourself, did you? Oh,
yeah. Oh, you didn't? Sure did. What type of
flight? 102. Yeah, 102.
Great. I checked out. 102. I flew them. A lot of them
exercised. So I bet you that was kind of nice to get
back in the driver's seat. It was. Well, I flew with
the National Guard. I flew just like every other
pilot. Really? I flew their full missions. I flew
with them on every type of mission they had. When
they went on maneuvers, I went with them and flew
with them.
Qualified combat ready just the same as every
pilot in there. I qualified combat ready in 102,
too. Okay.
Wow. How about... Do you think that the Air
National Guard when you were in Indiana, do you
think that they were, I mean, did they qualify
combat readiness? I'm sure they did. I had to say
that was one of my jobs to see that they did and see
that they had the program to do it. We had a range of
our own down below Indianapolis. We dropped bombs
and scraped and did everything that was required
to fill this attorney. And, well, that's quite an
accomplishment, isn't it, to get National Guard
or Reserve troops combat ready? Sure is. And we
have tactical evaluation. The team come in and
evaluate it. I mean, fast. So, that is an
accomplishment. Isn't it true that, I don't know
about most, but large amounts of our Reserve
troops are not combat ready? for one reason or the
other. Yes, I think that's true. Very stable.
Why'd you become the vice commander? That was a
promotion, wasn't it? Yes. The commander of the
Air Force, 17th Air Force, just told me he was going
to send me up there to be the vice commander.
I said, yes, sir. I'll be happy to go. That was the
F-105. And did you get to fly that, too? Oh, yeah. I
had to. I don't think the boss man would let me stay
there if I hadn't. But you wanted to do that anyway.
Oh, yeah. What was your job there? Vice Commander.
Well, I know, but what did you do as a Vice
Commander?
And
how large was the command? Well, it was a wing base.
I'd say 3,000 people. How many airplanes? We had
75, 75 radios on that category. I
assisted the commander and he started his
responsibilities. I did whatever he wanted me to
do.
some
of the things he turned over me to do, but to mark a
training program, to handle a lot of disciplinary
matters, court-martials.
Did
you have any discipline
or
anything like that? No. Did troops get along well
with
the Germans? Oh, yeah. Yeah, the Germans. We had a
good relationship with the locals. We had tennis
matches with them. No kidding? Yeah. Soccer
teams. We invite them to our football games.
He
had me do a lot of letter writing and
things like that. Who was a commander? I had two
different ones.
He was later a brigadier general. The second one's
name was Blood. Blood?
Was he a cold-blooded guy? No, he was a nice guy. He
retired down in Austin.
I was wondering about this time that France was en
route to get out of NATO. Yeah, that was getting
pretty hairy. How so, and how did that affect you
people? Oh, the NATO language was supposed to be
English, and the French controller started
talking French, and they made it very difficult to
get a clearance to fly with France, so we more or
less stayed away from France. Well, we did fly over
there. We did fly over there.
It got pretty sticky. Were there negative
feelings toward the French? Yes. Do you remember
any incidents or episodes? No, not to bring up any
incidents or episodes. It just was a general
feeling against them. And did it, now of course
they were moving things out of France and into
Germany. Did that have any impact on your air base?
Yeah. How? Well, not on our air base. Some of them
had moved. Ramstein must have had a big increase.
Yeah. Well, that was at Midburg. Yeah, right. Oh.
We did have some of the guys go back to France and go
by and see some people that they had known and said
the people told them that this wasn't what the
French people wanted, it's what they'd all
wanted. And it had nothing to do with their
feelings against the Americans. And these are
some people that had been stationed in one of the
bases that had to move. and going back to see their
friends in France. What was the general attitude
of the Air Force toward the French in this
behavior?
Well, it was a gentle, gentle feeling of disgust
and awe.
not necessarily the French people themselves.
And we started calling them Air France, Air
Chance. They couldn't be dependent upon us.
That's right. That's good.
Well, you have to leave Germany. You were there for
four years. I suppose your wife was with you,
wasn't she? Yeah, my wife and children. And they
were in American schools. Were you eager to get
back to the United States after four years?
Well, I wasn't particularly eager to come back to
the job that I was in. Yeah, Commandant of?
Squadron Officer School.
Of the what? Squadron Officer School. Okay,
Squadron Officer School. at the Air University,
so you're back in education again. Yeah. And this
is a position of responsibility. How many
students are at that school a year?
Something over 2,000. We have 703 classes
of 750. And how long does the course run?
I didn't think I'd ever get that number. About 12
weeks. 12 weeks. Now, what was the aim of the
school? Well, the purpose was to qualify the young
officers to be Spartan-level
staff officers
How did you do
that? Well, we gave them a very thorough academic
course, and then we put them in practical
problems, and they were all divided into
seminars, and the seminars worked as a group to
solve the problems. And each seminar, each little
group, each section had its faculty member in it.
We divided them up based on their backgrounds, so
we would get a completely heterogeneous
background together. They weren't homogenous.
Sure. Everybody had their ideas. This guy did the
SAC, and this would be the MAC, and this guy. We
broke up the section by computer and assigned them
that way. What did you think was the quality of that
school? I thought it was outstanding. It was
outstanding when I got there.
Did you improve it? I mean, was there anything that
you could do? The only thing that I could do was try
to preserve the standard that we had and select
people. We'd select instructors from the people
going through, and we had very high standards. To
qualify to be an instructor at Squadron Officer
School was a real honor. They were highly
motivated and really gung-ho. What rank were most
of the instructors? First lieutenants and
captains. We had students who were second
lieutenants and first lieutenants? First
lieutenants. They were basically all first
lieutenants? First lieutenants, you might have a
captain or two.
Kirstie Townsend, less than seven years service.
Were they all career-oriented officers? Um,
yeah. How did you maintain those high standards
besides picking top notch instructors when
vacancies occurred?
Well, the organization had a real high esprit de
corps, and we critiqued everything before we put
it on. We made sure it was what we wanted before we
put it on.
And even every lecture that I gave was rehearsed
and critiqued before we put it on. And they don't
mind shooting, punching punches at you. At the
boss. At the boss, and tell him All
due respect, sir, but... We had one
old retired civilian professor that was real good
at that, too. Everybody participated in
everything. We even had the athletic board. We had
a hell of an athletic board. I was assigned to a
section, and I competed in that section and all
that too. No kidding? All the families there,
after we'd finish our sports, we'd have all the
families there for kicking.
What type of athletics? Well, we played soccer,
flicker ball, you know what flicker ball is? It's a
little longer than basketball courts. We played
with basketball back boys in football. You can't
run with the ball, you have to pass it. Is that the
one where you run three steps and have to throw it?
Yeah, hit the board, flicker ball.
Soccer, flicker ball. And you participated with
all of your... Volleyball, volleyball.
But basically, it was your aim then, just to
maintain those high standards. Well, improve
them if we could, but... Well, was there any way you
could improve them? No. Then did you improve them?
I don't know whether we did or not, but we tried to.
What specifically did you try to improve, do you
remember?
Well, we took suggestions from the students and
staffed them, and if they looked good, we
implemented them. We did make some changes. So
there was a good relationship between
instructors and students. Oh, yeah.
They're just like... It was a very close
relationship, and over each there were two
different wings, and then there was
competition between the wings. We started
several new programs, but I don't remember
specifically what they were right now. Now, at
this time, at this time, of course, the warrant is
really increasing.
You'll hear 1964, 65, 66, especially 65 and 66, the
big buildup. And here you are at Maxwell Air Force
Base. I was wondering if you applied for service.
Did you want to go to Vietnam? Oh, I sure did. Did you
apply? No, I had no way of applying. Well, I mean,
did you volunteer? Did you write a letter? Did you
have somebody that you could? No, I didn't have
somebody I could write to. I could have, but I
didn't. I didn't write a letter at that time.
I figured that I had a good chance of going there as
soon as I finished my tour, but I wasn't. No, so what
happened here in July 1967 to September 1967, here
you're sent off to the Azores. You're the
commander of the U.S. forces in the Azores, but at
the same time you get a promotion. Tell me how, what
happened on, how'd you first learn the fact that
you were going to be promoted to a general officer?
Um, my boss told me. The
commander there in the university. Told me I was
going to do this. Well, what'd you say? I said,
thank you, sir. Told him that was great. Did you
think that you were going to make it to generals?
Not at that time. Why not? Well, I just didn't know
whether I'd had enough experience to warrant
promotion.
The way you get promoted, you've got to get on the
major commander's list before you even get
submitted. And then after you get there, well,
that's it. a promotion board and makes a decision.
Probably 6,000 colonels or however many they're
going to promote.
So your chances are not always good.
I just happened to have my commander on the
platform. Who was that commander? General
Parkinson. Carpenter at the University of, he was
the commander of the area.
And you think that's the main reason you received
that promotion? Because of his influence? Yes.
Was he his research? Yes.
Did they give you a certain, did they tell you about
how you were supposed to act when you became the
general? No. After I got my assignment, I was made a
brevet general, a brigadier general, because the
commander of the Portuguese Air Force in the
Azores was a brigadier general. And my promotion
wasn't due until after I was reported in, so I
pinned on my stars before I got promoted. I got
promoted, but I didn't get paid. I'll put it that
way. I got promoted, but I didn't get paid until
later. And so that was when you arrived in the
Azars, you'd be on the same level as the commander
of the Portuguese
Air Force. Tell me about that job in the Azars. How
large was our force at that time? Our force was not
particularly dark at that time. It was a command, a
joint command under St. Glam. And it was a joint
command, Army, Navy, Air Force command, for the
Azores, which was mainly lodges,
airbases.
The Air Force organization was a wing, was an air
base wing under Military Airlift Command.
As such, I reported to the commander of the 21st Air
Force
in New Jersey, which is a subcommand of Military
Airlift Command. But as a Joint Commander, I
reported to the Joint Chief of Land. And this Air
Base Wing maintained the
base and serviced all the airplanes, maintained
the airplanes that came through. We had assigned
to us a C-54. That's the only airplane we had. No
kidding. This must have been mostly a diplomatic
job. But
the Navy had a squadron there of anti-sub warfare,
so they didn't fly. And the Army maintained the
rescue boats. What did the Air Force do? The Air
Force took care of them on the ground. Took care of
their one plane? No, it took care of everybody. Oh,
it took care of everybody's plane on the ground. We
didn't take care of the Navy's planes that were
there, because they had their own squadron and
maintenance hangar, and all the transit
airplanes. See, it's a transit business. The
American Air Lift Command and the Motor Air Lift
Command came through there daily,
hauling supplies, different people, different
places. But it was a very unusual command, because
the Army had all the boats, and the Navy had all the
airplanes, And we took care of everybody on the
ground and protected them. We had the Air Police.
We had the large... And you were in charge of... You
were the senior officer in charge of all of them,
right? In charge of all of them. And also the
liaison with the ambassador to Portugal, the
chief of staff of the Portuguese Air Force. And I
went to Lisbon. About once a month. Really? To see
the Secretary of the Air Force, to see the
Ambassador. To see our Ambassador? Yeah, our
Ambassador. Who was he at the time? Ambassador
Bennett. How did you get along with the State
Department people? Just great. We had a very
pleasant relationship. I got along well with the
consul to the Azores.
Military governor of the Azores. I had to go over to
see him. He was on another island and so was I. He was
on the same island as the consul was. We had a very
close relationship. And it was a real good working
relationship. We had civilian programs that we
were hanging on to with the local Missouri and, you
know, the island we were on. What type of civilian
programs? We were getting semen for them. It was a
people-to-people program that Eisenhower set
up. People-to-people program. Semen for
improving the stock. Sterile med flies to help
eradicate them. You know, different programs
like that.
And we entertained the Portuguese, all the
Portuguese hierarchy. They entertained us. It
was more a diplomatic job. You're absolutely
right. How'd you like that? How'd you like being a
diplomat instead of a... It was pretty
challenging, I'll tell you. It was a pretty
challenging job.
only had one bad thing happen. Well,
the Portuguese had a club on the beach,
and we had some black people.
And we were allowed to go out there and participate
in it. And these blacks came in while the... Were
they Americans? Yeah, black Americans,
servicemen. Came in on this, uh, broke in, uh,
busted in on the end of this club, which had been
reserved that night for a party by Portuguese
officers. And they were, they had altercations in
place. That was, that was really bad. Well, what
happened? They started fighting? Well, they had a
little fight, and they left. And they were under
your command? Yeah, they were under my command.
The blacks were under your command? Yeah, the
blacks were under my command. I wasn't going to go
out and attack them. How'd you handle them?
I
consulted my boss. after it happened, and he sent
me some assistance.
A lawyer who had handled similar cases and was a
great assistance,
by the way, when he got there.
I restricted the airmen to the base, and then
discussed
the matter
with the senior Portuguese commander and put my
head in my hand and went to see the head of the Air
Force, the Portuguese Air Force, and told him that
We would handle it in a way that is pleasing to him.